---
title: "Thoughts on applying for a faculty position"
date: 2022-02-05
categories:
  - "Academia"
summary: "Personal notes on the opaque ordeal of applying for a faculty position."
---

There is already more than enough information and advice on how to go about applying for a faculty position on the internet, so I won’t reiterate what others have said. Of my personal experience, on the whole it was quite similar to what you have read already. Applying for such a job is reminiscent of applying to bachelor programs in North America; a bunch of schools have similar deadlines (Nov. to Dec.) and and you need to send a bunch of things as a part of the application package (CV, cover letter, statements, and so on). By February, you will have heard back from some schools asking for a screening interview. Past that, you get invited to the final interview which typically happens around March to April. After grueling days of talking to upward of 20 different people and trying to appear intelligent, you wait for an answer. With any luck, you get that email with the words “We are pleased to offer you the position of …”, and after jumping up and down for about 10 minutes, you start going through the contract with a fine comb. Then comes negotiation, and signing of the contract. The last bit is the preparation for the move, and the anxiety of doing a job that you are wholly not prepared for. I will write more on that topic very soon.

That is it, in an impersonal nut shell, and now comes the details. I had the luck and privilege of applying for jobs in the midst of a pandemic. Just from a survey of the positions being advertised, I already noticed that it was scarcer than usual. (This was pointed out already by a number of websites.) I ended up applying to approximately 25 openings to five different countries (USA, Canada, UK, Singapore and the Netherlands).

There I was already being selective I suppose, I would have applied to a Swiss school but there were no openings. The rest of Europe was difficult given a significant language barrier; most French and German schools wanted those languages to be spoken at least to some degree. Most of my applications went to the States just because of the shear number of openings. I already crossed Australia off the list just because it was too far, but Singapore was somehow okay…

The majority of these applications went to mechanical engineering, but also to material science, civil engineering, mathematics, and physics. I received approximately 10 desk rejections (hard to count them all), 6 screening interviews (2xUSA, 2xCanada, 2xUK), 4 final interviews (2xUSA, 1xCanada, 1xUK), and 2 offers (1xUSA, 1xUK). This meant about 10 applications went into the ether and were never heard from again. My eventual destination was a material science position, in the US. From what I could see, the process went as normally as covid would allow. Both the screening and the final interviews were done remotely but otherwise, not much changed. Unlike the year before, when no one knew what to do, this year there were at least some strategies in coping with the covid related limitations.

Overall, the process was demoralizing and anxiety inducing. It forced me to question my own worth as well as my drive to become an academic. (Just as an aside, these negative thoughts and emotions don’t go away.)

For the screening calls, the typical procedure was: I sat in a zoom call with some of the committee members for about 15 minutes. I was asked to give a 5 min presentation (with 5 slides) about my research, and I was questioned for another 10 minutes. The questions were boilerplate (the questions were read off a piece of paper), yet my answers had to be interesting. It was quite obvious 2 minutes in which committee members were interesting and friendly people, and which were boring ol’ duds. There were schools that I immediately liked and disliked by extension (fortunately, the opposite was true too!)

The final interviews were very tricky given the large time difference between me and most of the universities I applied to. I did all of them at my EPFL office, and I brought an air mattress in I could sleep after the interviews invariably end at 2am. I do not have many on-site interviews to compare with, but sitting on my butt for 6 to 8 hours for two days straight talking to many different people was exhausting, especially because I had to appear excited and interested the whole time.

As is the custom, I was asked to give a seminar at each of the final interviews. The seminars were of paramount importance as these were the moments the members actually pay attention to what I did, and thought hard about whether I would fit in the department. The chats with the deans were perfunctory and stilted for the most part, they invariably went on about the mission of the college and the university (watch The Chair on Netflix, it’s so accurate). The chats with the department chairs were where I gauged whether they will provide the support I needed to succeed. The chats with other faculty members could be just chats, or grueling questions. With some faculty members, we talked about where to stay in the city, day care, social scene, and other random things. With some others, I had to defend my research as if I were back in PhD defense again. Mind you, these people may be your colleagues for decades, you gotta like them too. I tried reading up on their research, but given the short time frame, it was difficult to come up with concrete collaborative projects. I imagine this to be useful.

I am a glutton for free food and a free hotel stay. So it was a bit disappointing to be skipped on those niceties. Instead, I was eating instant ramen in the office at 2am before crawling under the desk onto my half-deflated air mattress.

Being a faculty member for about half a year now, I hear gossip from the other side, or I infer things (perhaps wrongly). First, the candidates invited for the final interview were already vetted by the Dean’s office to be acceptable or at least tolerable. Second, perhaps obvious, committee members are human beings with prejudices and favorites. With less strong candidates, the objections were universally shared, but with strong candidates, opinions differ. Lastly, at the stage of the final interview, unless you majorly screw up the seminar or you were misjudged at the initially screening or you were invited for less than honorable reasons, the chance of you landing an offer is almost exactly 1/(# of people being interviewed). As in, all the interviewees would have been hired if there were space, but there never are, so the committee members try to 1) pick the least objectionable choice, and 2) maximize their own collaborative opportunities.

This was blackbox to me. So after days of painstakingly presenting the best version of myself in these final interviews, it was disheartening to not receive a single explicit rejection from the schools that didn’t want me. I had to call and email each one of them, only to get a one sentence reply saying “no.” in a sleepy tone of voice. For the schools that did want me, the pressure to accept the offers are relentless. Given that a department hires about one faculty member a year, the risk of not being able to get anyone may be enormous and severe from the department side (say, if the first choice rejects, and the second choice had already gone somewhere else, and the third choice is too objectionable).

The negotiation part of offer acceptance was ambiguous. What I read online made it out to be a bloodsport. Yet it felt like playing a game where I didn’t know the rules, against an opponent that was going to winning regardless. The mentality that this is the moment where you hold all the power is a bit misguided. Keep in mind that the “opponent” you are negotiating with is in fact your very-near future colleague who wants you to succeed (be tenured). Whether it’s during this phase, or after you start the position, this objective doesn’t change. There may be less leverage they can apply too the upper management, but I still exercise the romantic notion that people are nice and will extend a helping hand.

During the interviews, get a rough estimate on how much start-up funding and how many PhD students, and how many Post-Docs you may ask for. There are the personal items (salary, summer salary, and moving expenses), and there are research items (everything else). Some institutions, like mine, had a fixed starting salary as determined by some bureaucratic people somewhere. That was not so negotiable (as far as I know, but what do I know?!), but my moving expenses were. You can also get some summer month salary. In terms of the start-up package, I got (or not) a combination of the following:

1.  There is discretionary funding, meaning you can buy whatever.
2.  You can ask for a named professorship, which will supplement the discretionary funding for a number of years.
3.  Start-up funding – you will need to write a detailed list of things you want to buy, and the cost of each. I did not provide actual quotes, but just the estimates.
4.  PhD students – To get you started, you may be offered a number of phd-year salary. Ask for more if you can.
5.  Post-docs – From what I hear, having a great post-doc can be very helpful.

I did not negotiate as effectively as I should have, nor did I know what I actually needed. Keep in mind that the start-up package is only there to get the system going, it is not meant to sustain a group. In fact, I already applied for equipment grants exceeding 1 million in my first year.

It will be okay.
